---
layout: post-no-feature
title: Iterating over variable-length sequences
description: "RNNs using the TIMIT dataset"
categories: articles
comments: true
published: false
date: 2014-03-17
---

Lately I've been working on enabling Pylearn2 to iterate over variable-length
sequences. In this post, I'll discuss my progress so far.

### The problem

Some types of models (such as convolutional or recurrent neural nets) naturally
deal with variable-length inputs. Unfortunately, for the moment, this type of
input is not well supported in Pylearn2: ...

Even more fundamentally, there is no straightforward way to represent data
structures containing variable-length elements in Theano. This means even if we
solve the `Space` problem in Pylearn2, ...

### New spaces

I wrote two new `Space` subclasses (`VectorSequenceSpace` and
`IndexSequenceSpace`) to deal with variable-length sequences. They're very
similar to the corresponding `VectorSpace` and `IndexSpace`, with few key
differences:

* Because of Theano restrictions, an object in living in a `*SequenceSpace` is
  considered to represent a _single_ example, unlike e.g. `VectorSpace`, which
  considers objects as batches of examples.
* A `*SequenceSpace` conceptually represents a sliding window over a vector. It
  expects objects living in its space to be matrices whose first dimension is
  time and whose second dimension represent what the sliding window sees.
* In order to enforce the fact that we're dealing with a _single_ example, it
  is impossible to convert a `*SequenceSpace` into a `*Space`. Doing otherwise
  would give rise to confusing behaviour: by going from a `VectorSequenceSpace`
  to a `VectorSpace`, suddenly everything the sliding window sees is considered
  as a separate example. The only conversion allowed is from an
  `IndexSequenceSpace` to a `VectorSequenceSpace`.
* Some methods such as `get_total_dimension()` don't make sense when dealing
  with variable-length sequences and are not implemented.

### New TIMIT wrapper

I also wrote a new TIMIT wrapper called TIMITSequences, which uses
`VectorSequenceSpace` and `IndexSequenceSpace` to represent its data. Iterating
over this dataset returns whole sequences. These sequences are segmented in
frames of `frame_length` and form matrices whose first dimension is time and
whose second dimension is what a sliding window of this length sees as it's
passing through the sequence.
