---
layout: post-no-feature
title: Iterating over variable-length sequences
description: "RNNs using the TIMIT dataset"
categories: articles
comments: true
published: true
date: 2014-03-19
---

Lately I've been working on enabling Pylearn2 to iterate over variable-length
sequences. In this post, I'll discuss my progress so far.

### The problem

Some types of models (such as convolutional or recurrent neural nets) naturally
deal with variable-length inputs. Unfortunately, for the moment, this type of
input is not well supported in Pylearn2: all `Space` subclasses expect the data
to be a tensor whose first dimension is the batch axis and whose other
dimensions are of fixed size. This means a sequence of fixed-sized elements
cannot be stored in those spaces, because all time steps of the sequence would
be considered as separate examples.

Even more fundamentally, there is no straightforward way to represent data
structures containing variable-length elements in Theano. This means even if we
solve the `Space` problem in Pylearn2, we're limited to batches of size 1 unless
some `TypedList` data structure is implemented in Theano.

### New spaces

I wrote two new `Space` subclasses (`VectorSequenceSpace` and
`IndexSequenceSpace`) to deal with variable-length sequences. They're very
similar to the corresponding `VectorSpace` and `IndexSpace`, with few key
differences:

* Because of Theano restrictions, an object in living in a `*SequenceSpace` is
  considered to represent a _single_ example, unlike e.g. `VectorSpace`, which
  considers objects as batches of examples.
* A `*SequenceSpace` expects objects living in its space to be matrices whose
  first dimension is time and whose second dimension represent a fixed-sized
  state, e.g. a features vector.
* In order to enforce the fact that we're dealing with a _single_ example, it
  is impossible to convert a `*SequenceSpace` into a `*Space`. Doing otherwise
  would give rise to confusing behaviour: by going from a `VectorSequenceSpace`
  to a `VectorSpace`, suddenly every time step of the sequence is considered as
  a separate example. The only conversion allowed is from an
  `IndexSequenceSpace` to a `VectorSequenceSpace`.
* Some methods such as `get_total_dimension()` don't make sense when dealing
  with variable-length sequences and are not implemented.

### New TIMIT wrapper

I also wrote a new TIMIT wrapper called `TIMITSequences`, which uses
`VectorSequenceSpace` and `IndexSequenceSpace` to represent its data. Iterating
over this dataset returns whole sequences. These sequences are segmented in
frames of `frame_length` and form matrices whose first dimension is time and
whose second dimension is what a sliding window of this length sees as it's
passing through the sequence.

As a proof-of-concept, I also wrote a toy RNN model (which you can find
[here](https://github.com/vdumoulin/research/blob/master/code/pylearn2/models/rnn.py))
to train on this dataset. I haven't had time to play with it a lot, but I hope
to find time to do so this week and next week and present some results in
another blog pose.
